Congenital Heart Defects
What are Congenital Heart Defects?
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
Congenital heart defects, or diseases, are problems with the heart’s structure that are present at birth. They may change the normal flow of blood through the heart. Congenital heart defects are the most common type of birth defect, occurring in about one percent of live births in the United States.

There are many types of congenital heart defects. The most common defects involve the inside walls of the heart, the valves of the heart, or the large blood vessels that carry blood to and from the heart. Some defects are simple and require no treatment, while others are critical and require treatment soon after birth.

Doctors often do not know why congenital heart defects occur, but several factors can raise the risk of having a baby born with a heart problem. Some risks include smoking or taking certain medicines during pregnancy, and a family history of congenital heart defects.

Congenital heart defects can usually be found by a doctor based on symptoms or by newborn or prenatal screenings. Sometimes, a doctor may need to run heart tests to help diagnose you or your baby with a congenital heart defect.

Over the last several years, the diagnosis and treatment of congenital heart defects has improved. For example, there are better options for treatment, such as medicines and procedures. Now, many children and adults are living with or have recovered from congenital heart defects. Managing your condition by receiving routine follow-up care, taking care of your mental health, and monitoring your condition can all help reduce complications and improve your quality of life.

Congenital Heart Defects
Types
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
IN THIS ARTICLE
Atrial septal defectVentricular septal defectPatent ductus arteriosusPulmonary stenosisTetralogy of FallotOther critical congenital heart defects
There are many types of congenital  heart defects. They range from simple to complex and critical.

Simple defects may get better on their own without surgery. Sometimes, a baby with a simple defect will not have any symptoms  . Examples of simple heart defects include atrial and ventricular septal defects, patent ductus arteriosus, and pulmonary stenosis  .
Complex and critical defects may cause life-threatening symptoms that require immediate treatment. An example of a critical heart condition is the Tetralogy of Fallot. Babies born with this or another critical congenital heart defect typically have low levels of oxygen  soon after birth and need surgery within the first year of life.
Atrial septal defect
An atrial septal defect is a hole in the wall of the heart between the left and right atria, which are the two upper chambers of the heart. The hole causes blood to flow from the left atrium and mix with the right atrium, instead of going to the rest of the body. An atrial septal defect is considerered a simple congenital heart defect because the hole may close on its own as the heart grows during childhood.

Cross-section of a normal heart and a heart with an atrial septal defect.
Cross-section of a normal heart and a heart with an atrial septal defect. Figure A shows the structure and blood flow inside a normal heart. The blue arrow shows the flow of oxygen-poor blood as it is pumped from the body into the right atrium and then to the right ventricle. From there, it pumps through the pulmonary artery to the lungs, where it picks up oxygen. The oxygen-rich blood, shown by the red arrows, flows from the lungs through the pulmonary veins into the left atrium. Figure B shows a heart with an atrial septal defect. The hole allows oxygen-rich blood from the left atrium to mix with the oxygen-poor blood from the right atrium. The mixed blood is shown with a purple arrow.
Ventricular septal defect
A ventricular septal defect is a hole in the wall between the left and right ventricles, which are the two lower chambers of the heart. Blood may flow from the left ventricle and mix with blood in the right ventricle, instead of going to the rest of the body. If the hole is large, the heart and lungs may need to work harder to pump blood. In addition, it may cause fluid to build up in the lungs.

Cross-section of a normal heart and a heart with a ventricular septal defect.
Cross-section of a normal heart and a heart with a ventricular septal defect. Figure A shows the structure and blood flow inside a normal heart. The blue arrow shows the flow of oxygen-poor blood as it is pumped from the body into the right atrium and then to the right ventricle. From there, it pumps through the pulmonary artery to the lungs, where it picks up oxygen. The oxygen-rich blood, shown with a red arrow, flows from the lungs through the pulmonary veins into the left atrium. Figure B shows two common locations for a ventricular septal defect. The defect, or hole, allows oxygen-rich blood from the left ventricle to mix with oxygen-poor blood in the right ventricle before the blood flows into the pulmonary artery. The mixed blood is shown with a purple arrow.
Patent ductus arteriosus
This common type of simple congenital heart defect occurs when a connection between the heart’s two major arteries, the aorta  and the pulmonary artery, does not close properly after birth. This leaves an opening through which blood can flow when it should not. In many cases, small openings may close on their own.

Normal heart and heart with patent ductus arteriosus.
Normal heart and heart with patent ductus arteriosus. Figure A shows the interior of a normal heart and normal blood flow. The blue arrow shows the flow of oxygen-poor blood as it is pumped from the body into the right atrium and then to the right ventricle. From there, it pumps through the pulmonary artery to the lungs, where it picks up oxygen. The oxygen-rich blood, shown with a red arrow, flows from the lungs through the pulmonary veins into the left atrium. Figure B shows a heart with patent ductus arteriosus. The defect connects the aorta with the pulmonary artery, a connection that should have closed to form the ligamentum arteriosum (see Figure A) at birth. The hole allows oxygen-rich blood from the left atrium to mix with the oxygen-poor blood from the right atrium. The mixed blood is shown with a purple arrow.
Pulmonary stenosis
Pulmonary stenosis is a type of heart valve disease in which the pulmonary valve is too narrow or stiff. This affects how well blood can move from the heart to the pulmonary artery, the blood vessel that connects the heart to the lungs. Many children with pulmonary stenosis do not need treatment.

Tetralogy of Fallot
Tetralogy of Fallot is the most common complex congenital heart disorder and is a combination of four defects:

Pulmonary stenosis 
A large ventricular septal defect
An overriding aorta. With this defect, the major blood vessel that carries blood to the body (aorta) is out of place. Instead of being above the left ventricles  , it is located between the two ventricles. As a result, oxygen  -poor blood from the right ventricle can flow directly into the aorta instead of into the blood vessel that carries blood to the lungs (pulmonary artery)
Right ventricular hypertrophy is when the heart has to work harder than normal which makes the muscle of the right ventricle thicker than normal
Cross-Section of a Normal Heart and a Heart with Tetralogy of Fallot.
Cross-Section of a Normal Heart and a Heart with Tetralogy of Fallot. Figure A shows the structure and blood flow inside a normal heart. The blue arrow shows the flow of oxygen-poor blood as it is pumped from the body into the right atrium and then to the right ventricle. From there, it pumps through the pulmonary artery to the lungs, where it picks up oxygen. The oxygen-rich blood, shown with a red arrow, flows from the lungs through the pulmonary veins into the left atrium. Figure B shows a heart with the four defects of tetralogy of Fallot, which includes pulmonary stenosis, ventricular septal defect, an overriding aorta, shown in the figure as increased output in the aorta; and a thickened right ventricular hypertrophy. These defects can cause the heart to work harder or allow oxygen-rich blood to mix with oxygen-poor blood. The mixed blood is shown with a purple arrow.
Other critical congenital heart defects
There are other types of critical congenital heart defects including:

Coarctation of the aorta
Double-outlet right ventricle
D-transposition of the great arteries
Ebstein’s anomaly
Hypoplastic left heart syndrome
Interrupted aortic arch
Pulmonary atresia with intact ventricular septum
Single ventricle
Total anomalous pulmonary venous return
Tricuspid atresia
Truncus arteriosus

Congenital Heart Defects
Symptoms
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
Symptoms of congenital heart defects depend on many factors. For example, symptoms may be different for newborns and adults. They also depend on the number, type, and severity of the heart defect. Some common symptoms are:

Bluish tone to a baby’s skin and lips
Fatigue, or feeling constantly tired
Heart murmurs, which are unusual sounds heard between heartbeats. Murmurs sometimes sound like a whooshing or swishing noise
Poor blood circulation
Rapid breathing
Shortness of breath during physical activity can happen in children or adults with a congenital heart defect

Congenital Heart Defects
Screening and Prevention
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
Almost all newborns in the United States are screened for congenital  heart defects shortly after birth. However, if you are at high risk for having a baby with a congenital heart defect, your doctor may recommend screening before the baby is born or strategies to help prevent a congenital heart defect.

Screening before a baby is born
Echocardiography or echo is a painless test that uses sound waves to create moving pictures of the heart. Your doctor may recommend a fetal echocardiogram during pregnancy if your routine ultrasound  shows any sign that your developing baby may have a heart defect or if you have risk factors for a congenital heart defect.

Newborn screenings
Pulse oximetry is a test that can tell whether a newborn has low levels of oxygen  in the blood, which may be a symptoms   of critical congenital heart defects. The test involves attaching sensors to the baby’s hands or feet to measure oxygen levels and is recommended for all newborns in the United States.

Low oxygen levels in the blood could be due to a congenital heart defect or could be a sign that something else is wrong. If your child has low oxygen levels, the doctor may repeat the test, or may run more tests to diagnose a congenital heart defect.

Can congenital heart defects be prevented?
While you cannot always prevent a congenital heart defect, you can take steps to lower your baby’s risk.

Avoid certain medicines if you are trying to get pregnant or are pregnant. Talk to your doctor about what medicines you take and ask which are safe to take during pregnancy
Control existing medical conditions, such as diabetes and phenylketonuria, which can raise your risk of having a baby with a congenital heart defect
Meet with a genetic  counselor if you, your spouse, or one of your children have a congenital heart disease and you are planning to have another child. A genetic counselor can answer questions about the risks and explain the choices that are available
Quit smoking and avoid secondhand smoke

Congenital Heart Defects
Diagnosis
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
Some congenital  heart defects are diagnosed during pregnancy or soon after birth. Others may not be diagnosed until adulthood. A doctor will do a physical exam to looks for symptoms of a congenital heart defect. Based on what they find, they may order tests to confirm their diagnosis.

Diagnostic tests and procedures
You or your baby may need one or more of the following tests to determine whether symptoms are caused by a congenital heart defect:

Echocardiography or echo is a painless test that uses sound waves to create moving pictures of the heart. It can help diagnose a heart defect or be used to follow progress over time. Echocardiography used during pregnancy (fetal echocardiography) can sometimes be used to help find a congenital heart defect before a baby is born
Electrocardiogram (EKG or ECG) to evaluate the rhythm of the heartbeat
Cardiac catheterization to measure the pressure and oxygen  level inside the heart chambers and blood vessels. This can help the doctor figure out whether blood is flowing from the left side of the heart into the right side of the heart, instead of going to the rest of the body
Chest X-ray  to show whether the heart is enlarged. It can also show whether the lungs have extra blood flow or extra fluid, which can be a sign of heart failure
Genetic testing to determine if particular genes  or genetic conditions are causing the congenital heart defect. Your doctor may refer you or your child to a doctor who specializes in genetic testing
Cardiac MRI to diagnose a heart defect or follow progress over time
Pulse oximetry to estimate how much oxygen is in the blood

Congenital Heart Defects
Causes and Risk Factors
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
What causes congenital heart defects?
Congenital heart defects happen because the heart does not develop normally while the baby is growing in the womb. Doctors often do not know why congenital heart defects occur. Researchers do know that genetics  can sometimes play a role.

It is common for congenital heart defects to occur because of changes, or mutations, in the child’s DNA  . The mutations in the DNA may or may not have come from the parents.

Rarely, congenital heart defects are caused by particular genes that are inherited  from the parents. That means a parent who has a congenital heart defect may be more likely to have a child with the defect.

What raises the risk of having a baby with a congenital heart defect?
Congenital heart defects are the most common type of birth defect, occurring in about one percent of live births in the United States. The risk of having a baby with a congenital heart defect is influenced by many factors including:

Family history and genetics. Congenital heart disease is not usually passed along to your children, but there is some risk. The risk is greater if your baby’s other parent, or another of your children, has a congenital heart defect
Smoking during pregnancy or exposure to secondhand smoke
Some medicines taken during the first trimester of pregnancy, such as angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors for high blood pressure  and retinoic acids for acne treatment
Other medical conditions like diabetes, phenylketonuria (a rare, inherited disorder that affects how your body processes a protein  called phenylalanine), or a viral infection called rubella

Congenital Heart Defects
Treatment
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
How are congenital heart defects treated?
The type of treatment will depend on which type of congenital  heart defect you or your baby has and how serious it is. Most simple congenital heart defects will get better over time and do not require treatment at all. However, critical congenital heart defects often require treatment.

Medicines
Medicine is often used if your baby has a specific type of congenital heart defect called patent ductus arteriosus. Usually, patent ductus arteriosus goes away on its own, however, sometimes medicine is needed to close the patent ductus arteriosus in premature infants.

Indomethacin or ibuprofen triggers the patent ductus arteriosus to constrict or tighten, which closes the opening
Acetaminophen is sometimes used to close patent ductus arteriosus
Procedures
Cardiac catheterization is a common procedure that is sometimes used to repair simple heart defects, such as an atrial septal defect and patent ductus arteriosus, if they do not get better on their own. It may also be used to open heart valves or blood vessels that are too narrow.

In this procedure, a thin, flexible tube called a catheter is put into a blood vessel in the groin or neck. The tube is then threaded to the heart. Possible risks of cardiac catheterization include bleeding, infection, and pain where the catheter was put into the body, and damage to blood vessels.

Surgery
In heart surgery, a surgeon opens the chest to work directly on the heart. Surgery may be required for many reasons:

To repair a hole in the heart, such as a ventricular septal defect or an atrial septal defect
To repair a patent ductus arteriosus
To repair complex defects, such as problems with the location of blood vessels near the heart or how they are formed
To repair or replace a valve
To widen narrowed blood vessels
Surgeries that are sometimes needed to treat congenital heart defects include:

Heart transplant

Children may receive a heart transplant if they have a complex congenital heart defect that cannot be repaired surgically or if the heart fails after surgery. Children may also receive a heart transplant if they are dependent on a ventilator to breathe or have severe symptoms  of heart failure. Some adults with congenital heart defects may eventually need a heart transplant.

Palliative surgery

Some babies are too small or not strong enough to have heart surgery. Instead, they must have palliative surgery, or temporary surgery, to improve oxygen  levels in the blood prior to heart surgery. During palliative surgery, the surgeon installs a tube that creates an additional pathway for blood to travel to the lungs to get oxygen, called a shunt. The surgeon removes the shunt when the baby’s heart defects are fixed during the full repair.

Ventricular assist device

This device is a mechanical pump that supports heart function and blood flow in people who have weakened hearts However, the abnormal structure of the heart in people with a congenital heart defect can make these devices difficult to use.

Total artificial heart 

A total artificial heart is a pump that is surgically installed to provide circulation and replace heart ventricles that are diseased or damaged. The ventricles pump blood out of the heart to the lungs and other parts of the body. Machines outside the body control the implanted pumps, helping blood flow to and from the heart. A total artificial heart may be needed instead of a ventricular assist device in people with a complex congenital heart defect.

Congenital Heart Defects
Living With
Share Email Print
Language switcher
Español
The outlook for children who have congenital  heart defects is much better today than it was in the past. Advances in diagnosis and treatment allow most of these children to survive to adulthood, which means that more and more adults are living with congenital heart disease.

What are ways to manage a congenital heart defect?
Receive routine follow-up care
Schedule regular check-ups with a primary care doctor as well as a pediatric cardiologist or an adult congenital heart specialist, if needed
Take medicines as prescribed to prevent complications
Go to the dentist for routine cleanings and brush your teeth regularly
Make healthy lifestyle changes
Choose heart-healthy foods. Following a heart-healthy eating pattern, which includes consuming plenty of vegetables, fruits, and whole grains, reduces heart disease risk factors like high blood pressure  and obesity.
Get regular physical activity. Most people with congenital heart defects can be physically active. Physical activity can improve physical fitness and lower many heart disease risk factors, including high blood pressure  . The amount or type of physical activity you or your child can do depends on the type of congenital heart defect, the medicines you may be taking, and the devices that may be implanted, Ask your doctor how much and what kinds of physical activity are safe for you or your child.
Quit smoking. Visit Smoking and Your Heart and our Your Guide to a Healthy Heart. Although these resources focus on heart health, they include basic information about how to quit smoking. For free help and support to quit smoking, you can call the National Cancer Institute’s Smoking Quitline at 1-877-44U-QUIT (1-877-448-7848).
Aim for a healthy weight. If you are overweight or have obesity, you can improve your health by aiming for a healthy weight.
Manage stress. Learning how to manage stress and cope with problems can improve your mental and physical health. Learning relaxation techniques, talking to a counselor, and finding a support group can help.
Take care of your mental health
Adults may experience depression or anxiety because of their heart health. Seeing a counselor or participating in a support group may help.
Children and teens who have serious conditions or illnesses may feel isolated if they need to be in the hospital a lot. Some may feel sad or frustrated if they have growth, development, or learning delays compared to other children their age. If you have concerns about your child's emotional health, talk with your child and your child’s doctor.
Parents or caregivers may find it stressful caring for a child with a congenital heart defect. Your child’s doctor may be able to help you find support.
Prevent or manage complications
Complications depend on the type of congenital heart defect you have. Some possible complications include:

Arrhythmia, which is a problem with the rate or rhythm of the heartbeat
blood clots 
Developmental disorders and delays. Children with congenital heart defects are more likely to have problems with behavior. They are also more likely to have speech and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorders.
Infections that can cause pneumonia or endocarditis (inflammation  of the inner lining of the heart chambers and valves)
Endocrine disorders, including thyroid problems, bone health issues, and diabetes.
Heart failure. Heart failure is the leading cause of death in adults with congenital heart defects. Some children with congenital heart defects can also develop heart failure.
Pregnancy complications. Women with congenital heart defects have a higher risk of complications during pregnancy and childbirth.
Kidney or liver disease
Pulmonary hypertension
Stroke
Though some complications cannot be prevented, many can. Some ways to prevent or manage complications are:

Take medicine as prescribed. Depending on the type of congenital heart defect, medicines may be needed to treat medical conditions related to your congenital heart defect. For example, anti-arrhythmic medicine may be needed to treat arrhythmia, anticlotting medicine may be needed to prevent blood clots  from forming, and blood pressure  medicine, such as diuretics and beta blockers, may be needed to control high blood pressure.
Use a pacemaker, if necessary, to help control abnormal heart rhythms (arrhythmias)
Receive routine vaccinations, which are especially important in children with congenital heart defects. Adults with ongoing heart or immune problems should have a pneumococcal vaccination to prevent pneumonia and complications such as meningitis.
Be sure your doctor is aware of your congenital heart defect before any surgery, not just heart surgery. People with congenital heart defects are at higher risk of problems during surgery.
Have a plan for possible emergencies. In case of cardiac arrest, caregivers and family members can train in cardiopulmonary resuscitation (CPR) and using an automated external defibrillator (AED).
Monitor your condition
To monitor your or your child’s condition, your doctor may recommend the following tests, depending on the type of congenital heart defect:

Blood or urine tests to monitor the function of organs affected by a congenital heart defect.
Spirometry to measure how well the lungs are working.
Abdominal  imaging using ultrasound, magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), or computed tomography  (CT) to look for liver disease.